New java manual (#413)
neo4j/driver-documentation: java-manual/modules/ROOT/pages/query-simple.adoc

= Query the database

> Once you have xref:connect.adoc[connected to the database], you can run queries using <<Cypher>> and the method `Driver.executableQuery()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have xref:connect.adoc[connected to the database], you can run execute <<Cypher>> queries using via `Driver.executableQuery()`.
```

[TIP]
`Driver.executableQuery()` was introduced with the version 5.8 of the driver. +
For queries with earlier versions, see xref:transactions.adoc[Run your own transactions].

== Write to the database

To create a node representing a person named `Alice`, use the Cypher clause link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/merge/[`MERGE`]:

.Create a node representing a person named `Alice`
[source, java]
----

> // import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;

Reviewer: Probably a left over?

Author: No, it does use `QueryConfig` to set the database.

var result = driver.executableQuery("MERGE (:Person {name: $name})")  // <1>

>     .withParameters(Map.of("name", "Alice"))  // <2>

Reviewer: I would show the required imports, actually the whole app (including the try block…)
At least people are gonna wonder which `Map` class this is and in the next line, from where the `QueryConfig` comes from.

Author: True, I should also import `java.util.Map`. My intention is to keep examples short and to the point, to avoid cluttering each one with all the boilerplate of class and full imports, but showing "partial/new" imports as comments. If people need a full skeleton to work with, the `Full example` at the bottom provides it.

    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())  // clunky  <3>
    .execute();
var summary = result.summary();

> System.out.printf("Created %s nodes in %d ms.\n",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
System.out.printf("Created %s nodes in %d ms.%n",
```

I do find the usage of `printf` unusual. Most people would use `println` and than just string concatenate I guess.
If you do `printf`, use at least `%n`, which gives you the system specific new line (sometimes even \n\r).

Author: > Most people would use println and than just string concatenate I guess.

If that's what the java world does, let's do that here as well. Will address it so.

    summary.counters().nodesCreated(),
    summary.resultAvailableAfter(TimeUnit.MILLISECONDS)); // can't default??
----

<1> specifies the Cypher query
<2> is a map of _query parameters_
<3> specifies which database the query should be run against

[NOTE]
`MERGE` creates a new node matching the requirements unless one already exists.
If a matching node already exists, it is returned.

> For _strict creation_, use the Cypher clause link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/create/[`CREATE`].

Reviewer: Read "strict creation" here for the first time.

I would probably just use `CREATE`, really. `MERGE` is complicated and for things to work proper, there must be constraints.

Author: This is a choice I took more than a year ago, and in retrospect I think you're right. I'm hiding a share of complexity here for no reason, and possibly encouraging bad practice. Let's go with `CREATE`, and also in other driver manuals.

== Read from the database

To retrieve information from the database, use the Cypher clause link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/match/[`MATCH`]:

.Retrieve all `Person` nodes
[source, java, role=nocollapse]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;

var result = driver.executableQuery("MATCH (p:Person) RETURN p.name AS name")
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .execute();

// Loop through results and do something with them
var records = result.records()  // <1>
records.forEach(r -> {
    System.out.println(r);  // or r.get("name").asString()
});

// Summary information
var summary = result.summary();  // <2>

> System.out.printf("The query %s returned %d records in %d ms.\n",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
System.out.printf("The query %s returned %d records in %d ms.%n",
```

[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;

var result = driver.executableQuery("""
    MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})
    SET p.age = $age
    """)
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .withParameters(Map.of("name", "Alice", "age", 42))
    .execute();
var summary = result.summary();
System.out.println("Query updated the database?");
System.out.println(summary.counters().containsUpdates());
----

To create new nodes and relationships linking it to an already existing node, use a combination of the Cypher clauses `MATCH` and `MERGE`:

.Create a relationship `:KNOWS` between `Alice` and `Bob`
[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;

var result = driver.executableQuery("""
    MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})
    MERGE (p)-[:KNOWS]->(:Person {name: $friend})
    """)
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .withParameters(Map.of("name", "Alice", "friend", "Bob"))
    .execute();
var summary = result.summary();
System.out.println("Query updated the database?");
System.out.println(summary.counters().containsUpdates());
----

[WARNING]
====

> It might feel tempting to create new relationships with a single `MERGE` clause, such as: +

Reviewer: This box should move upwards I think and include a bit about constraints. IMHO we are leaving driver land here though and going Cypher. I would probably spare me the hassle and focus on executing Cypher alone.

Author: Yeah, it's a fine line between giving you a minimal cypher crash course if you're building an app without being proficient in cypher already (which I think you should _not_), and giving you too much detail. At the same time, I want to put you on guard for very natural mistakes like this one, but not go on a tangent. 

However, if we replace `MERGE` with `CREATE`, the whole problem vanishes and this note is not needed anymore.

----

[#query-parameters]
== Query parameters

*Do not hardcode or concatenate parameters directly into queries*.
Instead, always use placeholders and specify the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/syntax/parameters/[Cypher parameters], as shown in the previous examples.
This is for:

1. *performance benefits*: Neo4j compiles and caches queries, but can only do so if the query structure is unchanged;
2. *security reasons*: see link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/protecting-against-cypher-injection/[protecting against Cypher injection].

You may provide query parameters as a map through the `.withParameters()` method.

[source, java]
----
var result = driver.executableQuery("MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})")
    .withParameters(Map.of("name", "Alice"))  // mark-line
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())
    .execute();
----

[NOTE]
There can be circumstances where your query structure prevents the usage of parameters in all its parts.
For those advanced use cases, see xref:query-advanced#_dynamic_values_in_property_keys_relationship_types_and_labels[Dynamic values in property keys, relationship types, and labels].

> == Error handling

Reviewer: This feels very odd to me. This is the case for all methods in all programs. 

I would rewrite this something along the following idea:

Running a query against a remote server can fail for a number of reasons. Some of them are due to syntactically wrong queries and similar, client side issues, some of them can be caused by network issues. The driver will retry running your query in many scenarios, such as temporary server unavailability. 
For all client side exceptions it is up to you if program defensive (i.e. check if records are available to avoid `[NoSuchRecordException](https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/exceptions/NoSuchRecordException.html)`), or if you just catch and handle them).

Author: I agree with you that I find this section border-line confusing. The reason it is here is user interviews from a few years back, where people were lamenting not knowing how to do "proper error handling", which I interpreted as "should I differentiate between the different exceptions the driver may raise, or how should I do?". But maybe I should have just ignored that part of user confusion since, as you say, this is how error handling in _any_ software works. We'd show it in the full examples anyway.

Because `.executableQuery()` can potentially raise a number of different link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/exceptions/package-summary.html[exceptions], the best way to handle errors is to catch all exceptions in a single `try/catch` block:

[source, java]
----
try {
    driver.executableQuery(...).execute()
} catch (Exception as e) {
    ...  // handle exception
}
----

[TIP]

> The driver automatically retries to run a failed query, if the failure is deemed to be transient (for example due to temporary server unavailability).

Reviewer: Remove this if you follow my above suggestion.

== Query configuration

You can supply further configuration parameters to alter the default behavior of `.executableQuery()`.
You do so through the method `.withConfig()`, which takes a link:https://neo4j.com/docs/api/java-driver/current/org.neo4j.driver/org/neo4j/driver/QueryConfig.html[`QueryConfig`] object.

> === Database selection

Reviewer: Just a general remark: I find this absolutely terrible and am wishing for quite some time that if no database is set on the driver, the drivers just should try `neo4j` and be done with it.

The examples look horrible with that dance and feel very much "in your face".

Author: Agreed, but what can we do. 

They also look horrible because the query config methods are defined on `QueryConfig` rather than directly on `ExecutableQuery`. If it looked like this, it wouldn't be as bad:
```java
var result = driver.executableQuery("MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})")
    .withParameters(Map.of("name", "Alice"))
    .withDatabase("neo4j")
    .execute();
```
I planned to bring this up somewhere else. All this config ballet (also in sessions and drivers) looks like madness to me.

If no database is given, the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/current/manage-databases/introduction#manage-databases-default[user's home database] is used.

[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;

var result = driver.executableQuery("MATCH (p:Person) RETURN p.name")
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())  // mark-line
    .execute();
----

Do not rely on the link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/cypher-manual/current/clauses/use/[`USE`] Cypher clause for database selection with the driver.

=== Request routing

In a cluster environment, all queries are directed to the leader node by default.
To improve performance on read queries, you can use the method `.withRouting(RoutingControl.READ)` to route a query to the read nodes.

[source, java]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;
// import org.neo4j.driver.RoutingControl;

var result = driver.executableQuery("MATCH (p:Person) RETURN p.name")
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder()
        .withDatabase("neo4j")
        .withRouting(RoutingControl.READ)  // mark-line
        .build())
    .execute();
----

> Even though routing a _write_ query to _read_ nodes will likely result in a runtime error, xref:transactions#access-control-note[do not rely on this for security purposes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The drivers do not parse your queries.
If you sent a _write_ query, such as a `CREATE (:Movie)` statement, they will just pass this on, preferring read nodes, which will eventually lead to a runtime exception.
Specifying the routing control is only about picking primary or secondary servers and not about xref:transactions#access-control-note[access control]. 
It must not be used for security purposes.
```

Impersonating a user is cheaper than creating a new `Driver` object.

[source, java, test-skip]
----
// import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;

var result = driver.executableQuery("MATCH (p:Person) RETURN p.name")
    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder()
        .withDatabase("neo4j")
        .withImpersonatedUser("somebodyElse")  // mark-line
        .build())
    .execute();
----

When impersonating a user, the query is run within the complete security context of the impersonated user and not the authenticated user (i.e., home database, permissions, etc.).

////
=== Transform query result

You can transform a query's result into a different data structure using the `result_transformer_` argument.
The driver provides built-in methods to transform the result into a pandas dataframe or into a graph, but you can also craft your own transformer.

For more information, see xref:transformers.adoc[Manipulate query results].
////

== A full example

[source, java]
----
package demo;

import java.util.Map;
import java.util.List;

> import java.util.Arrays;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

import java.util.concurrent.TimeUnit;

import org.neo4j.driver.AuthTokens;
import org.neo4j.driver.GraphDatabase;
import org.neo4j.driver.Record;
import org.neo4j.driver.QueryConfig;
import org.neo4j.driver.RoutingControl;

public class App {

    private static final String URI = "<URI for Neo4j database>";
    private static final String USER = "<Username>";
    private static final String PASSWORD = "<Password>";

    public static void main(String... args) {

        try (var driver = GraphDatabase.driver(URI, AuthTokens.basic(USER, PASSWORD))) {

>             List<Map> people = Arrays.asList(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            List<Map> people = List.of(
```

                Map.of("name", "Alice", "age", 42, "friends", Arrays.asList("Bob", "Peter", "Anna")),
                Map.of("name", "Bob", "age", 19),
                Map.of("name", "Peter", "age", 50),
                Map.of("name", "Anna", "age", 30)
            );

            try {

                //Create some nodes
                people.forEach(person -> {

>                     var result = driver.executableQuery("MEGE (p:Person {name: $person.name, age: $person.age})")

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                    var result = driver.executableQuery("MERGE (p:Person {name: $person.name, age: $person.age})")
```

>                         .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder().withDatabase("neo4j").build())

Reviewer: Store the config in a variable and reuse it.

                            .execute();
                    }
                });

                // Retrieve Alice's friends who are under 40
                var result = driver.executableQuery("""
                    MATCH (p:Person {name: $name})-[:KNOWS]-(friend:Person)
                    WHERE friend.age < $age
                    RETURN friend
                     """)
                    .withConfig(QueryConfig.builder()
                        .withDatabase("neo4j")
                        .withRouting(RoutingControl.READ)
                        .build())
                    .withParameters(Map.of("name", "Alice", "age", 40))
                    .execute();

                // Loop through results and do something with them
                result.records().forEach(r -> {
                    System.out.println(r);  // doesn't unwrap properties, Record<{friend: node<4>}>, nor .fields() does
                    // python shows <Record friend=<Node element_id='4:5bad7cf2-d17e-4d07-9266-b88c8720ebd2:4' labels=frozenset({'Person'}) properties={'name': 'Bob', 'age': 19}>>
                });

                // Summary information

>                 System.out.printf("The query %s returned %d records in %d ms.",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                System.out.printf("The query %s returned %d records in %d ms.%n",
```
